No more calls because they had, the water was
winding down at that period of time. Okay. And then
I graduated and the elder had called me and said
there was a veteran that died at Brennan and he
might want to come over and look and I did and so I
bought his practice you might say. All right, now
how did you meet this young lady? Well, do I have to
admit that?
You want me to tell us? Well, it doesn't make any
difference. I met him when we were double dating.
Go ahead. Anyhow, yeah, we had to update it, and
then I asked her for a date, and they went from
there. Okay, and had you gotten married before you
graduated? No. Oh, okay. It was almost a year
before we went over there and then we got married.
So you go to Brenham and open up a veterinary
practice in? In Brenham, Texas. In what year?
1945, February. February 45. And it was a general
practice? General practice, yeah. There's
nothing like it was then. Those were, in that time
there was, during the war there were very few
tractors made, and a lot of things weren't there,
but horse and mules were still holding on, and a lot
of it was horse and mule, and a few small animals.
And it was a challenge, but I guess because of the
variety it was easier. Can you give some examples
of what the veterinarian's fee was at that time?
What did you charge? Well,
trying to figure that out, I was accused of being
too cheap. It was a dollar a mile plus five dollars
to deliver a calf. would vaccinate a dog for two and
a half. And basically that was it. I remember I did
an interception for, I rejected the gut of a cow
that had an interception and that was $25. And that
was foolish on my part, but not having a mentor, and
you may recognize that I'm very strong on the
influence of mentors, and I did not have one, and
going out and working on those things. Fees were
very inexpensive, $5. How many other
veterinarians were there then in Washington
County? There was one other at that time. He was a
non-graduate, a graduate of Fort Worth
Veterinary School. and about 1900. And later
there, others came, and I think there's 10 or 12
over there now in the same unit. How long did you
practice over there before you joined, came back
and joined the faculty? I was over there about four
and a half years. Okay. And I had an opportunity to,
I decided, I really wasn't, it wasn't what I wanted
because I like to do something, I want to do it
reasonably well. And so I left there and went to,
took a job at LSU in the Experiment Station and with
the Veterinary Science Department. And there I
taught, did research in poultry diseases and
other animal diseases.
And then the opportunity came to the Air Force was,
put a pretty good pressure on upon us and so I
volunteered and was commissioned captain. This
would be during the Korean War period? During the
Korean War period in 1951. And where did you, where
were you sent? I went to Edwards Air Force Base, the
Air Force flight center, Chuck Yeager's whole
place. And he was there doing, flying the X-4 at
that time.
We lived on the base. What were your professional
duties? Well, we were, at that time, they had a chip
colony there and I had little exposure to that. And
they were using those to study wind blasts. And
Colonel Stapp had a program where he had these
sleds lined up on the tracks and they would use
rocket power. At that time they were developing
rockets. rocket-powered planes and
rocket-powered this, and they used that to propel
these sleds with these chimps at high speeds down
these tracks. And then the main assignment there
was food service inspections and sanitation,
sanitary.
I guess like public health officers do. And then
we, for the quartermaster market center in Los
Angeles, would buy meat and mainly eggs and
poultry. At one time I had five master sergeants in
my outfit and two others. And I really didn't have a
lot of work to do. Did you find that a pleasant
assignment? And you were there how long? We were
there two years, and we signed up for three. And
like everything else, that was winding down, and
they came out and said, you can go if you like. And I
said, I like. But it was very nice. We lived out
there in the hospital compound with a lot of good
people in the same boat we were in, and physicians
that had been through the same kind of a situation.
Where after that? Well, I had committed when I was
at LSU to go to the LSU Medical School to study
virology, and because of this other thing
intervened, I came back, I said, well, I still am
interested in microbiology, and so we came back, I
went over to Texas University, and I went, they
sent me over and said, well, I went to see Dr.
Williams who then was head of the Department of
Microbiology and also the head of their athletic
committee. But anyhow, he said, he said, go over to
graduate school. I went over there and I walked in
and there was a little gal sitting at the table
there and I told her what I wanted to do and she said,
have you got two years of foreign languages? I
said, no, I got one. She said, well, you can't do
that. That's what's the matter. All you dentists
and all you other people, you you think you can get
away with this, and I went and got out of there and I
came over here. Well, the only program they
offered here was a Ph.D. in the medical area was in
pathology, and so I talked to Hilton Smith, and he
said, well, go over and set it up. Now, what role,
what was his task? He was the head of the
department. All right. And what's his first name?
Hilton Atwell Smith. Oh, Hilton Smith. Okay.
Yeah. And so this is 1953? Two? Three. Three. Yeah.
How many other doctoral students were there? One.
Ph.D. Okay. And I was the second one to get a degree,
a Ph.D. that takes you to finish curriculum. How
long did it take? It didn't take a heck of a long
time. I started in 53, I got a master's in 54, and I
got a PSD in January, I guess, of 57. Was the GI Bill
important to you? Some, yeah. I had saved quite a
bit of money by cashing in my leave time from the
service.
We borrowed a little money. Where did you all live?
We lived first on College Main. A little house up
there.
It's now apartments there, huh? Yeah. Chemistry
teacher. The kooky one. Oh, yeah,
sure. Yeah, yeah. That's right.
Who was your chairman of your doctoral? Hilton
Smith. Hilton Smith. All right. He was quite a, he
wrote probably the very best yet, and the very
first literary pathology text. At that time, was
he probably the most highly respected member of
the department? Well, he was the member of the
department. And the others were assistants. Oh,
okay. And I mean by that,
he was the leader in his, in veterinary pathology.
About how big was the veterinary faculty then in
numbers? Oh, veterinary faculty? The total. I
guess there were 30, 40. And four in pathology, did
you say? And still located where it had been. Yes,
it was down in the old building down there. I
remember that it was, I did a lot of study at night.
And the reason I did that, that Hilton was a very
capable person. And he told the university that he
had to have air condition because his paraffin
wasn't, would melt so he got a wind air conditioner
and that was in
the old hospital. Who was the dean when you were a
doctoral student?
B-O-U-G-H-T-O-N.
That's a very interesting history. That's pretty
well out loud. I just pulled out that book there
that Pat Byrne wrote on history. He replaced, at
that time, Dr. Dunn, who was the head of pathology,
microbiology,
and all that. Belton was a A researcher from, had
been out in West Texas, done a lot of work and
research and the administration wanted to bring
somebody in to develop the program. And they
brought him in and he picked, he decided he needed a
pathologist, so he knew Hilton Smith. And so he
brought him in. And I was fortunate enough just to
happen in and find, well, this is a program. As you
look back on your doctoral studies, what were the
most important courses, most important research
that you did?
Well, as a student, I was quite interested in renal
quality or kidney diseases. I did some work on, it
was Hilton's idea. He said, I can't diagnose
leptospirosis. I know that's what it is, but I
can't prove it. I want to know why. So my
dissertation was to find out what parameters
influence the persistence and the capability of
demonstrating those and then he arranged for me to
go to the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in
Washington. And they were working on that spiral
scenario, so I continued that as a resident there,
and then came back and wrote my dissertation. Now,
how many other doctoral students were there when
you were working on yours? Just one. Just one? So
there are two? S-I-P-P-E-L,
so that there was not a group to gather with and be
friends with or anything like that? Not really.
And Hilton was a rather unique person. He had some
of my own philosophy, I guess, that he would say,
what about this? And I'd expect him to explain it to
me. He said, you figure it out. He said, we'll
discuss it. Did you become acquainted with some of
the faculty members that became an important
friendship later while you were a student?
Well, there weren't many around. Millet, honey.
Huh? He was a faculty member. Did you make
acquaintance with some of those faculty members?
Yeah. I studied under John Miller. Describe him as
a teacher. He was a gentleman's gentleman, an
excellent teacher, very concerned about his
students. And being a gentleman without children
of his own, I can say he had a certain respect for
them and treated them as such. Did you all have a
nickname for him? No,
Dr. John. Dr. John. Other faculty members that you
met as a student that you remember gratefully,
proudly?
Of course, I appreciate Hilton Smith. Hilton was a
very intelligent person, but he was standoffish.
But I still respect a person, a professional that
named himself in a professional way. And of
course, there was Dr. A. Square Leonard. A.
Square? Yeah, A. A. Leonard. That's what the
students called him, A. Square. And he was head of
the clinics and what have you.
And some of them, we had a lot of others, R.D. Turk.
Did he have a nickname? Not really that I know of.
Everybody called him, his colleagues called him
Dick. But they told a lot of stories about Dr. Turk.
He was hard of hearing and wore a hearing aid. You
heard this probably.
He would be lecturing and back there and somebody
would say something derogatory in the back room
and he'd just say, you know, I can't hear you but I
can read your lips.
He, on the day in 64 when I got this teaching award,
he got the next one. And I was up on the stage and when
he walked by the microphone, he said loudly to Mr.
Rudder, Earl, y'all must have been pretty damn
hard up to give me one of these. And Mr. Rudder was
kind of like. That's the way he is. He was. Was he
always congenial with everybody? Oh, yeah. And he
talked. He was a very intelligent person. And if
you live long enough, you'll know that certain
things push certain people into certain
endeavors. And I think his hearing pushed him into
academia. Okay. And he was a Kansas State
graduate. Very intelligent. But he was always he
could talk a lot, and one time he was talking to me,
and I responded, I didn't know what to say. He said,
you've just been bamboozled. Now, as a young
couple, what community activities did you all get
involved in while you were a graduate student?
Studying in church. Which church? Lutheran.
Lutheran. And it then was located where? Right
where it was. Right now, except where the main
church was, where the fellowship hall is where the
church was, it was an old house that they had
converted and made into it, and then later on the
new church was built. They actually took over.
Well, it was a mission church for students. Now,
Missouri Synod or American Lutheran? About how
big was the congregation in those days? A hundred?
Less. I think less than that. I really do. But you
had a full-time minister.
Well, they always did. We weren't here when it was
first organized. But Swaggart was there, wasn't
it? Yeah. And yeah, he was full-time. And where did
a young graduate student and his family go if they
were going to have any kind of enjoyment on a
Saturday night? Brown. Huh, where? Brown. Oh, to
go to family, okay. Either that or we didn't do a
whole lot past school You know, he was so involved,
he was so tied up with his research that we didn't.
And I had the children a whole lot. Of course, I
participated in a few. I think the graduate
student wives had just a few little
get-togethers. And you didn't have a huge amount
of money. Yeah. Because I wasn't working. I was
home with two children. All right, as you are
getting near the end of this doctoral program,
What did you think you were going to do
professionally? Well, I was going into research,
education and research, and I had an appointment
to, well, I was at that time, I guess what I, I was
dickering with Oklahoma State, the department
head there. And they, I was in Washington, D.C.,
and Hilton at that time was on the advisory board
for me. at the institute. And he had had a
resignation, and so he called me and asked me if I
was interested. And he told me what salary I
wanted. I said, well, the salaries are not that
intriguing, but the opportunities are. Now, to
join the faculty here? Yeah. And this is 1953?
Do you remember what the salary? About $4,500.
$4,500. And
so you decided to accept? Oh, yes. In fact, we had
signed the one for Oklahoma State. We were ready to
mail it in when he called him and offered that to
him. I had an opportunity. I'd dickered with the
Air Force office in Washington. about going back
into the Air Force service. And they told me, they
said, you can go to Alaska if you like for your
foreign duty, which you'd have to do now. And so we
talked against that, I guess, and fought against
it. Describe the department in terms of its
people. and its facilities when you became a
faculty member in 1954?
Well, we were down in the building, down in the
civil engineering building on the second floor.
Hilton had his office in one building and it was a
room that had a place for a secretary and a lab. and
we were assigned various offices down. You'd get
one here and one there and I had an office down there
and that was
pretty much it. There was only about four of us.
Only one lab? One lab. But did each of you have a
workspace in that lab? We had a place where we had,
those were rather large rooms, and we had to have a
table where we could store some of our specimens,
stuff like that. But all of the lab work, which was
then, was pretty much cut and dried paraffin and
embedded pathology tissues. And that was about
it, yeah. And for faculty? I believe that was about
it.
later what I took over was five. Hilton resigned.
Alright and what were your duties when you began?
What courses, what assignments? I helped, worked
in the laboratory, teaching laboratory of the
histopathology part of Hilton's course and then
full of necropsy duty which is servicing the the
animals that came from a clinic. And Hilda did most
of the histopathology then, the biopsies and
stuff that they wanted tumor. That was his
business, he took care of that. At that time we had
no research at the time, but later they did
develop. Which, in which courses in the
veterinary curriculum did Joel Did you all have
some for all three years?
There was one basic course in veterinary
pathology, then later they developed a course in
clinical pathology, and then there was a duty with
the clinic later on that was developed. And about
how many students were in each veterinary class
then that was admitted? Basically 64. 64. All
male, all Texans? All male and mostly all Texans,
but I don't remember.
The next day I signed a contract with the state of
Louisiana to accept nine students from
Normally were those nine students good students?
They were good students because they were
selected mostly from the applicants from LSU that
took the pre-vet, and they knew that that pre-vet
program was there. They were mostly good
students, yes. Describe some of your early
teaching experiences with What were some of the
things that you soon learned you were going to
encounter? What were the students like as they
began their coursework?
Well, basically the department was pretty stark,
and the students were fairly quiet. They
responded accordingly. And I don't know of any
particular exciting times that were at that. Did
they think of pathology as a hard course or easy? I
figured it was one of the harder courses. And
they'd take it the first year?
It was the fourth year. And your... The year
preceded graduation. Okay. Describe a typical
day for you as a young faculty member. What time did
you get there? What did you do? What time did you
come home? Well, we were there at 8 o'clock. And you
know, it was five days, six days a week. And we were
out at 8 and... we'd have a class, there'd be a
lecture in which we would attend, Ronald Hilton
would lecture and then we would go into the labs,
which here we used the two sections twice a week.
And we would prepare that and go in there and the
students would all have a microscope and they
would, we would circulate among them and they'd
have to answer their questions. And then we'd ask
them questions and set up practical exams and
things like that. And that was over whether it was
back to work or research or whatever we were doing.
What time would you normally come home? I don't
know what time. It was usually home for dinner and
then back to level. So you came home for lunch
midday and then... Went back. Went back. And then
came home say maybe about 6 to eat. Okay. Then went
back and didn't come home until about 11. It was
interesting enough to... And we felt that's what
we should be doing. Did you feel well accepted as a
junior faculty member by your colleagues? Yes, I
think so.
I think that there was that peer, not peer, but that
relationship of the senior professor and the
junior professor. I could see that, but it didn't
bother me because I've been brought up in a
discipline world all my life. Did the students
soon develop a nickname for you?
I'm not sure. My son
got, my son got a time to borrow some notes. He
graduated from that, from one of the students. His
classmates, in that, he found in the back of it, he
says, what's that, Bridget? He'll get your A.
At that time, what do you think was the reputation
of the School of Veterinary Medicine here
nationally? How did we... I think it was
respected, but I think it was also downgraded
because it was a school of the South, and that thing
which hangs over anything in the South is not good
as it is in the East. And the only vet school
anywhere near was Oklahoma State? Oklahoma
State, I think, was developed in the 50s or so. I was
on faculty here before they were developed. Oh, so
it wasn't, okay. No, it didn't exist. So
Kenton State had one? Kenton State was an old
school. Okay. And Cornell. But there wasn't one to
go all the way to... Even Georgia was a bloke in the
50s. Okay. Auburn had one. Yeah. Auburn had one,
and I don't remember the dates of those. I've never
been bothered by those things. That was one of the
problems I had in classes, that if there were
eponyms, I refused to learn them. I know that about
one flunked me on my pre-lab because I didn't know
what Ben Ness's walker disease was. I said, yeah,
sure, I'll tell you all about it.